As long as that little red light is running, it flies.
We're talking with Hermione.
That's how we pronounce your name.
That's correct.
And let's start with a few easy questions.
wouldn't you say that it's kind of intimidating to do a book on Wolfe where there's such a shelf of other books?
Well, I did start by saying that a lot of people have their idea referred from the title of Edward Albee's play and that I was rather afraid of Virginia.
It was a daunting prospect and I must admit quite frankly that I was
I was asked to do it.
I don't think I would have... Really?
Yeah, I was asked by one publisher.
I said, no, it's a ridiculous idea.
There's too much on Virginians already.
And then someone else asked me about three months later.
I thought, well, maybe this is the time and maybe I am the person to do it.
But I started in great trepidation.
It was like a... I guess it was like an arranged marriage where you then fall in love.
But you had already done critical studies.
I'd done work on her.
I'd been reading her all my life, really, and I'd written a book on the novels.
It was the first book I wrote...
which came out in 1977, just a little introduction, really, to the novel.
So I didn't want to do that kind of literary criticism again.
And since I've been reading her, since that book, in the last 20 years, I think she's changed a lot.
A lot of posthumous publications have taken place, which have changed our sense of her, you know.
Well, all the letters, all the diaries, a lot of the essays are now, a lot of the manuscripts are now available.
So I think our whole perception of her is this rather ethereal...
lady authoress.
So she's changed, you would think, more from the diaries and the letters than from the actual literature itself?
Well, I think the posthumous, the enormous amount of posthumous publication has greatly added to and developed our sense of her from when she died and there were
you know, the novels and some uncollected journalism, and I think people didn't have the sense of her as they do now, which I wanted to get across in the book, of this hugely energetic professional woman who wrote like crazy every day of her life, and she wasn't unwell.
I mean, the work out for it is just, I know they had servants, but they don't go through a lot.
You know, I am bemoaning that I have to do a column every week, and I love doing interviews, and I do this, this is my passion, really, I've been doing it for 20 years.
And I'm writing a book and all this.
And you have in here that she's doing this book, doing these short stories, doing 37 works of criticism.
That's pretty close to my... I know.
And then do you write 10 letters a day?
And then I don't write any letters at all.
I email, which I love because I can do it in two sentences.
I'm sure she would have liked email.
But it's not just the amount of the work and it's not just the fact that she'd been a lot written about.
It's also that she was a daunting prospect in other ways, too, I think.
Because for some people she's a heroine and for other people she's anathema.
She certainly has achieved... I mean, she's an icon here.
How is she perceived in the UK?
I'm just beginning to see this this week being on tour here.
She's more adulated here, I think.
She's also more appropriated here, it seems to me.
I mean, there are very...
appropriative versions of her here.
Because as part of an agenda, I mean, I don't think you have the culture-wise in England.
Well, I think there is, I mean, I think there are two things.
No, it's interesting.
There are two things here.
One is that I think the class reading of Virginia Woolf is much more critical in England than it is here.
There's a much more pronounced middle-class resentment of her
snobbery, which is there, and of her sort of upper-classness and of her privilegedness.
You hear a lot more about that in my country than you do here.
Here, I think she has been much more taken up by different branches of feminism and made to serve as she can for different kinds of visions of women's lives.
It's a very different kind of reading.
And I think what is important from my standpoint is that
She is taken up because the work does endure.
Yeah, the work.
Oh, sure.
I mean, because we do see any number, and this is not any particular faction, but you'll be so quick to put forward a candidate.
And then when you look at the work, it's,
It's not going to hold up.
Who are you thinking of?
I know what you mean.
But you know what I mean?
People who fulfill a certain agenda.
Right.
Because there are too many agendas going on here in this country.
But she's like Shakespeare.
You can use her for any vantage point.
If you want to be critical of her, that's my God, there's the ammunition.
If you want to turn her into a victim, there's the ammunition.
If you want her to be a saint, there's the ammunition.
She's...
very exploitable, I think, actually in the best sense.
For instance, Sarah Orange Joy is now really emerging.
Oh, is she?
She has been beatified.
She's just one step below sing to it, I think.
No one's ever heard of her in England, do you see?
Well, you see, but she's correct.
And her work is fine.
Actually, it's good.
And I'm delighted that she's being...
resuscitated, but I wonder if it's because of the literature as well, all these things are, you know, high literature.
But Wolfe is really wonderful because she does, she has the legs, as I say.
I mean, they're there.
I mean, the work does, it does.
Now, let me just switch thoughts here.
Do you think that with so much biographical work, so much critical work,
that like Shakespeare and Dante and Cervantes, that every generation, do you think she's in that category?
Where every generation requires herself?
She has a line which was very encouraging to me while I was doing this book.
In fact, it's about Shelley.
She says, there are some stories that have to be retold by each generation.
And I think that is very appropriate for her.
She's there, but you think she is in that way.
Well, I think she changes, just as I was suggesting the posthumous publishing history has rather changed our view of her.
I think she changes as we go on into the later part of this, as we come to the end of this century.
I think she can be rewritten.
I'm sure there will be more versions of Virginia Woolf to come.
People go on wanting to make sense of her in different ways.
And I think now it's partly to do with
the way these great early 20th century modernist figures like Proust and Joyce and, you know, Thomas Mann and, you know, Faulkner, I mean, they're sort of, the dust is clearing.
I think we're beginning to see them, you know, sort of afresh and be able to see them whole, you know.
So I think that's important.
I've just forgotten what I was going to say then.
I'll just come back to that idea, yeah, about how we've,
The question of whether each generation should have its own reading.
Yes.
Yes, that's the other thing, is that like Sylvia Plath, she's one of these writers who keep, oddly, the readings of her keep pace with attitudes to psychoanalysis or to suicide or to mental illness or to family life.
So she's actually been, as it were, re-read through various fashions, if you want to call it that, or phases of psychoanalytical theory.
So that in the late 60s, 80s, 70s, you know, when R.D.
Lang was a big deal, and there was a lot of reading of her to say, no, she wasn't mad, she was truly sane, and the family is responsible for the oppressive regime that she had.
And then in the late 80s, early 90s, you had, as it were, Virginia Woolf as a victim of
childhood sexual abuse, and there is some truth in that, but it became the whole story, you know, and I'm sure there's someone writing a book now on Virginia Woolf and multiple personality disorder, you know.
So how did you, I love the structure of this too, I mean, as you point out, and it was wonderful that you started with a chapter called Biography.
Yeah.
Because you do make clear how you're going to do this.
Yes.
And you say, I can't start by saying, look what you do.
She was born.
But how did you come to the structure that, because it is a very interesting structure.
Well, I didn't, she herself is so skeptical about biography.
She's so critical of the biography she knew in her time.
Yeah, she read it all the time.
She tried to write it.
It was her favorite reading.
She often is writing a kind of version of biography when she's writing fiction, I think.
I mean, look at Orlando.
But she's very critical of the way that biography reduces or simplifies or falsifies the subject's life.
And so that was one reason for not just writing a naively straightforward chronological, you know, for her it seemed quite wrong.
But I also, when I began, I actually wanted to totally get rid of chronology.
and not have a storyline and just have these themes.
And I started like that and it didn't work.
I mean, you do need to tell the story.
You've got to have the narrative.
You've got to keep the reader on that tapeworm of storyline.
So what I decided to do was in a way sort of alternate or pause and every so often collect together certain ideas.
Rather, as she says about her characters in Mrs. Dalloway, that she likes to
hollow out big caves underneath her character so they go back in time.
She's so interested in memory too, and the past and the present always crossing in her mind.
So it was partly to do that.
And I know we don't live our life by themes, but I thought to thematise something like reading or money or fame or her attitude to various people like Taffyn Ransfield helped, you know, because often in biography you get a whole lot of facts
one after the other endlessly, and it's sometimes hard to make a shape out of it.
There's a very interesting book just published within the past two weeks called The Hidden Writer.
I don't know the... It's about diaries.
Oh, well, I'm assuming.
The diaries of the writer's Alexandra Johnson, who lives around here, teaches at Harvard.
Terrific book.
Can I have a question?
She takes seven female diarists, and two, of course, are Mansfield and Wolfe,
which are perfect.
Perfect.
And she starts it with Marjorie Fleming.
The diarists who started keeping diaries at certain points in their lives of what Fleming has made as a child.
Then you have Sonia Tolstoy.
Of course, a diary is a trap in a way for a biographer because you believe that when someone is writing their diary that they're telling it like it is.
And so the Great Temptation with a great... You know, right.
Exactly.
With these compulsive lies like Catherine Anne Porter, you know.
But with such a great diarist as this, you know, you have to be very careful, I think.
Of course, she's massively in here in her own voice, and I wanted that, you know.
But you've got to be careful.
There are some things she doesn't talk about much in the diary, and there are things in the diary which are not
quite sure you can trust.
What's your feeling on the diaries today?
Do you think she did not want them, do you think she wanted all of her papers destroyed?
I think she was in such terrible distress and sense of loss of self-valuation at that point when she wrote that note, please destroy my papers, that I think that's not something she would have
actually um in some moods really wanted it was quite clear in the last couple of years of her life that she was processing the diaries and turning them into an autobiography which she would i think have gone on writing and it would have been a very extraordinary
book um and the first you know when their house is bombed they go to london the whole place is a wreck what's the first thing she does she collects stories i love that that will probably make its way into my new book one way or another saving the diary yeah that's what's important let's before we i like these conversations that go off in a hundred directions but the reading is really very important to me
You did say that she is the perfect example of something disformed by their reading.
Maybe you could just talk a bit about it.
Well, she didn't go to school, and she didn't go to university.
Two things which she was quite, I mean, particularly university, she was very bitter about that.
She had instead this extraordinary home education under her father's monitoring, but rather free tutelage, I think.
She had the run of his books.
She started to read compulsively, avidly, widely, from the age of about five, as far as I can work out.
You know, she's reading Hatfield's Voyages and Carlisle's French Revolution when she's 12 years old, as well as all the 19th century novels.
She's an addict, there's no doubt about it.
And she... Is she limited by the books that her father had?
I think at first, I don't think it was tremendously limiting.
I mean, he had a very good, you know...
But that's important in her development, that isn't it?
Her father's books would have to be crucial to her development.
Oh, crucial, hugely.
Her father's books.
Yes, her father's books.
And her father was a biographer who was also very interested in history and in the 18th century.
And she read history books for a long time.
And in fact, he thought she would be a historian.
And there's a great deal of that in her work.
I mean, there's a lot of histories of English.
literature and english culture and civilization within her fiction the last book she was going to write was a history of reading and writing called a non she is it's she that's her whole program really and then all these essays which i have flagged for for my own citation about reading about sure no and there are these wonderful essays not just about
critical essays on reading certain writers but the actual physical emotional experience of reading you know how differently you feel when you're reading she says if you're reading peeps's diaries you feel quite different than if you're reading
you know montaigne or or shakespeare you know you actually become a different person you know it's a very modern post-modernist idea of reading the read the book reads you the books read us yes but it's so fascinating what did she mean by that could you just i think that's my phrase rather than i think that's my right but i think what she's constantly trying to describe there's an s there's actually an article which starts off
sweetly as a lecture for school girls called How Should One Read a Book?
And she says, what you must do is you must read the book as if you were the writer.
You know, you must get inside.
It's all that empathy and getting crawling inside the skin of the writer and trying to sort of see what he or she is up to and how they're doing it.
I mean, it's a great lesson in critical reading.
But she also talks a lot about how when you're reading something, it's all in bits and you're getting lots of sense impressions and lots of very strong feelings.
And then when you finish the book, you have to somehow make a shape of it.
And that's when you start.
turning your reading notes into an essay or trying to see what the whole thing is.
And she needs Babby to do that.
She often says, I've got to make a shape out of this book.
I can't just let it.
She can't just flick it aside and turn to something else.
Did she enjoy her reviews?
Writing the reviews.
I think early on she felt very inhibited from writing for the TLS under male editors who expected her to be her father's daughter.
And there's that whole thing later on about killing the angel in that, throwing the ink pot at the angel in the house who was standing by and saying, be nice to the men, don't be offensive, don't get angry.
And so when she manages to do that and write a bit more openly, I think she enjoyed it more.
She distinguishes, it seems to me, between hack work,
you know, review work, and essays written for her own, more for her own pleasure and at greater length, though she also did publish those as journalism, very often here and in England.
I guess what I'm getting at, did she want to share her take on literary receptions with other people?
Yes, and that's the whole thing.
That's why she's such an important self-educated reader, because, for instance, she was passionate about public libraries, and because public libraries are under such...
economic pressure in my country probably here as well yeah that's right I think of her as a great advocate of the public library as the university of what she calls the common reader which is the phrase she takes from Dr Johnson which is the person like her who is obviously an uncommon reader in many ways but the person who didn't have no university education in her case and eclectic eclectic you know picking up all sorts of things from all over the place
Now I've lost my... Of course, you were asked to do this, I would imagine, on the strength of your earlier critical work.
Yes.
What kind of baggage do you bring to a project like this?
Do you come with any kind of preconceived... Yeah.
I kept being asked while I was doing it, what is your line on her?
which was a question I actually found very uncomfortable.
I found rather distressing, because I didn't know what the answer was.
You researched to find out, too.
Yes, and very often when you're researching for biography, you don't know what you're looking for.
It's weird.
It's as if you go through all this documentation and manage it.
I think those are the best biographies where you don't know what you're looking for.
Well, you have a sort of vague hunch, but actually feel you need to read the whole thing again once you've done the work.
And I often felt I was going through these vast archives of manuscripts and letters and so on.
And I thought, well, it's exciting, but, you know, my God, where do you stop?
And I wasn't quite sure really what I was... I wanted to get... I wanted to make her real.
I wanted to make her real, not just an icon, not...
not someone who had been turned into a figure who represented something.
I wanted to feel what it would be like to be her.
I guess that was the... And I suppose if I had a take or a line, it was to do with her professionalism, actually.
Her amazing commitment to her work, her very acute sense of herself as a professional writer who could earn money, which she loved to do, for her work.
Not as this sort of...
crazed victim, you know.
She was Virginia Woolf, too.
I mean, Virginia Woolf, not Victor Woolf or something like that.
You know what I'm saying?
She didn't hide her sexuality.
No, she was always very aware of herself as a woman writer in a preponderantly male market, actually.
I mean, you have so many women who have written through history, and it's challenged.
It's not possible for a woman to have written.
I mean, she actually had to prove her credentials.
I'm not talking about Wolfe in particular, but... Well, and she also had to work against expectations.
You know, what kind of writer was she supposed to be?
She was supposed to be Leslie Stephen's daughter.
And actually, she completely subverts that.
Well, somebody asked her to write his biography.
um and she wrote she writes she writes a letter i can't remember something someone's just written said would i write leslie stephen's biography good grief so what would you say were the greatest were there surprises i guess you mentioned the professionalism but i don't know if that was a surprise maybe you're just more impressed by it but were there any did she surprise you
I think her courage, yes, I think I knew, I sort of knew I admired her before I started, but I didn't realise how much I admired her, and I think her extraordinary valour and stoicism and courage just always knocked me back, and also, I know this sounds crass, but she's very intelligent, you know, I mean, if you say, what is the first adjective you would use for Virginia Woolf, it would probably be
sensitive or imaginative or creative or inspired, but she's powerfully intelligent.
And I think the essays, you know, even if she'd never written any novels, would still make her a big figure.
Yeah.
You mentioned that you would almost be frightened, not frightened, but anxious.
Well, I mean, she didn't like, she didn't like, well, even if you're not a fool, she didn't like middle-class girls.
She didn't like
rivals she didn't like i would think of myself as younger than her i guess you do if you're the biographer you know it's strange that their age passes your age you know you get a different relationship um but i you know she i don't think she would have liked me very much winifred holtby no it wouldn't no no no i'm too well because she didn't she didn't like
She was very critical of the middle classes, which I am.
And she was very leery of, you know, bright, younger women.
She was not always... Yeah, she's jealous.
She's rivalrous, you know.
She's competitive.
Which is wonderful, but the Mansfield... Yes.
Well, diary, which does kind of come out.
The letters between them, yes.
You see, when... Okay, thank you.
When...
Winifred Holtby, before she had become well-known for South Riding, wrote the first English biography of Virginia Woolf in 1932.
I discovered this hadn't been used before.
There's a wonderful archive of correspondence between them and the whole public library.
And Virginia Woolf is very polite to her and very rude about her and says, you know, she's a Yorkshire farmer's daughter who learned to read by minding the pigs.
And when she finally gets the book, it's not clear whether she's actually read it.
And she says...
You gave me so many ideas about Virginia Woolf that I would really like to write a book about her myself.
You know, she's a tremendous put-down.
And so, you know, with someone like that, she was very on edge.
How are we doing?
The book, of course, speaks for itself.
You don't mind if I don't question you specifically about the book?
No, no, no.
That's my job.
uh what's your attitude on this uh and i i think that you refrain from this which is good and then this trend that we have this psych psychobiography she would be a sitting deck with a psychoanalyst kind of a biological thing well she has been um and and there's a lot to be learned from that i mean i don't think one can
So I'm not having any of that at all, no.
And there are very good psychobiographies.
And she has brought Freudian too, which is important too.
Well, I think Adele's biography of James, which is your classic psychobiography, is actually a very revealing book in many ways.
And there's no doubt that Virginia Woolf had a deeply traumatised childhood and that you can, I think, account for a lot of what she writes about and how she writes and how she behaves.
through that childhood, but I don't want to infantilize her, you know?
Seems to me there's something about psychobiography that infantilizes the writer, that keeps them in the nursery, that means that they can, it's a determinist view, really, isn't it?
So Freud, I mean, Freud is a very determinist writer, and she hated that when she finally gave in and started reading Freud in 1939, incredibly late, given how much she was around her, and they published him, and
He was in the air, and when she started reading him in the war, she was deeply disturbed.
She really hated him, actually.
I didn't know that they'd met him.
Yeah, isn't that wonderful, the story of him giving her a Narcissus?
I think that's so funny.
He was very ill.
He was very old.
He'd just been got out of Vienna, and they went to tea in Hampstead, and they had this extraordinary conversation about whether England and the Alliance
powers after the First World War had somehow been to blame for the rise of Hitler.
And Freud said, no, not at all.
It's as if he's giving a sort of absolution.
Yeah.
Well, tell us one of these meetings.
Remember where Anthony Burgess wrote he had Cervantes and Shakespeare meetings?
Yes.
I love that.
They're both, apparently, who died on the same day, and they were temporaries.
That's right.
And it's just to imagine.
I know.
Well, it's like Joyce and Wolfe living exactly the same dates.
And she's moved by his death when she hears about him.
Or Joyce Wolf and Lawrence.
She's very interested in Lawrence, actually.
She never met him.
She was once on a train in Italy.
She looked out of the station window, Rapallo, and there was Lawrence sitting on the station platform.
I know, it's wonderful.
point out you know her reading wasn't always it hasn't helped how she has misread Joyce in particular I mean and you would definitely call that a misreading yes I think she's always been blamed terribly for that and in my country and in Ireland you know there's a great sort of battle of the modernists I remember when they both came out of copyright the first time before they changed the European copyright laws
in 91, there was a sort of standoff between Joyce and Wolfe.
It was bizarre.
I kept going on the radio to say, no, it is possible actually to like Joyce and Wolfe.
You know, it doesn't have to be either or.
You know, so there was this idea of modernism as sort of male and macho and epic on the one hand and sort of delicate and ladylike and luminous on the other.
And so people say, oh, Virginia Woolf is such a snob about joy.
She says he's like a schoolboy scratching his pimples and rolling in his arms because it's really bad.
It had nothing to do with Joyce.
It had nothing to do with Walter.
It was just one of those great put-downs, you know.
Yeah, well, she was stupid about him, but at the same time, she tries harder.
In the Burg, I think it is, or in Sussex, there's a whole page, several pages, manuscript notes, when she starts reading Ulysses.
Very interesting.
She's really trying to work out.
She read that very girly, which is very interesting.
She read it when it came out in serialization in 1918.
You say 1819 when those entries were made.
The Paris edition was 1922, so she was reading it.
I think she did what she did with Proust, actually.
It's interesting.
She had a go, and then she stopped, and then she started again.
She quite often does that in her reading.
But she certainly read him very early.
Yeah.
And she was very influenced by Eliot, who she had just got to know, who kept saying to her, this is the great book of the century.
And she would go home and say,
great tom says this is the great because actually why don't i get it it's not like emily dickinson confessing in her letters how scandalized she would be about whitman if you read it i mean i never read him but i heard he was what is it whatever it is it's quite entirely disgusting yeah she's reading him yeah she's reading him and at the same time she's reading mansworth she's reading richardson she's reading may sinclair
It's a whole... That's the point in the late 1910s, early 20s, when she's trying to work out, what does she want fiction to do now?
What does she think it should be doing?
We talk about, we use the word baggage, but what kind of baggage do you think she brought to Joyce?
What did she bring to Joyce?
Well, it's a class... Again, it's a class thing.
It's a class thing, and also she's...
Issues of censorship are problematic for her.
She resents censorship, but she's also quite squeamish, I think.
She's quite prim in some way.
In her letters, there's an amazing letter about shitting to Duncan Grant, where she compares trying to end a letter with trying to end a visit to the lavatory.
It's a breathtaking letter, actually.
There's always a little bit more.
But in fiction, published fiction, she can't take it.
So when Bloom goes to the lavatory... She's analised.
And she thinks he's doing it to show off.
That's the trouble.
And she thinks it's all about him.
She reads Ulysses, I think, wrongly.
as a very egocentric and... It is interesting that their dates are precisely the same.
Had she read him with perspective, do you think, with distance, do you think it would have been a different reading?
It's funny, she doesn't go back to him.
It's interesting that you say, I never thought of that, actually, but when she hears of his death a few months before hers, in 1941, this very touching moment in the diary, she says, yes, Joyce is dead, whom I never met, and I remember...
Catherine Mansfield coming to the house and starting to, we were laughing about him and mocking him and then she started reading and she suddenly stopped and said, something in this.
And she says, I suppose this must be a scene that would take its place in the history of English history, which of course it has, you know, but she has not gone back and reread him since.
Excuse me.
It's all right.
You're thinking about your book.
I am.
What I really love about this book, and I will make it so clear in my piece, is that the work is never... We never stray too far away from the work, writing.
Her work.
And you might explain to me how...
important that was for you in the writing of this life.
And I guess that would be a comment on your view of the biographer's mission as well, the literary biographer's mission.
I had done a book on the work, as I said, so I didn't want to just replicate that.
I didn't want to write this time.
I had written a biography of Willa Cava, where I was really most interested in the work, partly because in England people don't read her very much, and I wanted to introduce the work really there.
So that was a book where I stopped to talk at length, chapter by chapter, about the novels.
But I didn't want to do that here, because there's so much already on the novels.
There were 200 books on the novels of Virginia Woolf.
And there'll be another 200, wouldn't there?
Sure, within a week.
That might have to Shakespeare has been approaching.
Yes, there's hundreds.
But what I wanted, so I only stopped once in this book and talk about a book separately in a little chapter in the middle, which is the chapter onto the lighthouse, which is to me her greatest book.
And I think all the themes of family
cohere in that book and all the things she's trying to do.
The New York Times book review, did you see that?
Virginia was scuttling to her lighthouse.
That's right, but even the illustration of it is cleverly in the White House.
Yes, shine on Virginia.
That was great.
I was very pleased.
So I only did that once.
The rest of the time, what I wanted to do was not so much interpret the work, but think about how... We're getting adjusted.
how it was for her to write those books, what place in her life she was at when she was writing those books, what it felt like to write the books.
I didn't want to do that thing saying X is Y, you know, Mrs. Dalloway is Ossaline Muller.
That's reductive too.
I think it's never as simple as that.
People pool together, as you know, all sorts of different things.
But I wanted to keep thinking, well, what did it feel like for her to be writing the years?
For instance, for a book I'm terribly interested in, through the early 30s, why did it hurt so much?
Why did she have such a bad time with it?
So it's more that, really.
It was reading, it was trying to explicate the writing of the books rather than the meaning of the books, if you see what I mean.
You say in the book that the...
perception of her today would even surprise her.
Do you think that she would be shocked by the... I think she'd be very gratified.
I think she'd also be aghast at how totally her privacy has been violated.
But I think she'd see that was coming.
She saw that coming in biography.
She could see that was coming.
But even when you point out, I mean, whatever her personal life was, I mean, it's really not that...
compared to other personal lives that we... No, nothing very scandalous about it at all.
Nothing scandalous about it at all.
No, people would like it to be more scandalous.
In fact, when this book came out in my country, no features editors were in the least bit interested in running anything about it before it came out.
It had very good reviews, but before, nothing.
And my people at Chateau said, they only would publish something or serialize it if you could show that she had had a secret love child by T.S.
Eliot, or, you know?
I mean, if I'd been able to knock up some juicy scandal... So much with British Kenwood attitudes on what makes a future story.
Yeah.
I was rather shocked.
How do you, if we could talk briefly, if you don't mind, it's the kind of thing that might be useful for this...
You don't have the same kind of cultural wars going on in your country that we have here, do you?
What sort of cultural wars?
Oh, I mean, on the campuses and the academy.
Shakespeare, not being required reading.
The Great Dead, White.
Yeah.
We get everything a bit later, as you know.
Of course, Shakespeare is a national poet, and he should be everyone's national poet.
It's shifting.
I teach American literature in England.
Now, that is interesting to me.
And what I would have taught 20 years ago when I started, which would have been, you know, in the 19th century.
Oh, I'm really interested in this.
Melville, Hawthorne, Emerson, Thoreau, Emily Dickinson, Whitman, you know, Mark Twain, Poe, that's it.
Now I get to teach Frederick Douglass, Harriet Beecher Stowe,
R. Nigg, you know, those kinds of, you know, Life in the Iron Mills, those sorts of texts.
And of course it's to do with the Norton Anthology and the way that sets the agenda for the teaching of American literature.
But, you know, the canon is changing in that aspect where I'm teaching as well.
Do you see it as one canon or a number of...
little canons.
Well, I'm very confused by the word canon, anyway.
That's a new word.
I mean, I'm an English major from the 60s, and we never used it.
Never talked about the canon.
And I went to a liberal arts school where, undoubtedly, we studied what is today called the canon.
But I've been reading Alan Bloom and all these people and Stanley Fish and so on, and I think what is happening here is not happening yet in England, and it's one of the reasons it may be easier in some ways to teach
at university level in Britain than it is in America.
I think we're not so up against these fierce agendas about minorities and about culture.
What I think is happening in Britain is there is a cultural war going on in some campuses between traditional literary studies and cultural studies, and I don't see why the two shouldn't.
marry and mix, but there is a bit of a standoff, I think, about that.
But I think that is what you find, and even to some extent, if you're teaching Arnig, and you're teaching Douglass, and you're teaching Stowe, I don't think anyone could argue that these are examples of great literature, those particular titles, for instance, but they're important.
Yes, they're culturally important.
I think Douglass is rather
a good book, actually.
But it's true that, you know, if you then... I have a first edition, however.
Very interesting.
Actually, another example of this, as in I do, um, I,
I put Little Women on an American 19th century course.
We only have nine-week semesters, so you have to really pick and choose, and it's a selected books course.
And I remember a colleague, a traditionalist colleague of mine, an Americanist, absolutely outraged by my having done this ten years ago.
What on earth have you put Louisa May Alcott on your course for?
Well, that's a nice part.
You should be teaching nothing but Emily Dickinson, Trane, Melville.
And now, I mean, he wouldn't have a leg to stand on because she has been, as it were, canonized.
She has been.
I have a 14-year-old daughter.
When she was 12, she really wanted to see Little Women in the movie, but she wouldn't...
to see the tape until she'd read the whole book.
Just for her.
And she said, Dad, it's 476 pages.
It's the longest book I've ever read.
I said, honey, you're 12.
I said, that's longer than most adults I've ever read.
Well, speaking of this reading level and of the canon and of Virginia Woolf, what is very interesting to me is how few of her books are generally read.
There are quite a lot of novels.
The books of Virginia Woolf that get read are Mrs. Dalloway, To the Lighthouse, Orlando, A Room of One's Own.
Maybe a little bit extra here and there, but basically that's generally it.
Are you talking about in universities now?
Well, actually, in universities, and also I go to bookshops and say, which Virginia Woolf books do you sell when I go and read in bookshops, and it's usually those.
to the general public.
But you were talking about your dismay over this whole concept of what a canon is.
And I think maybe I interrupted you.
I can't remember what I was saying.
But we were talking about, you know,
What is the canon?
Is there a canon?
It's like saying, what's pornography?
You know it when you see it.
Maybe, you know, we know that Shakespeare and Dante and Cervantes are... And Virginia Woolf.
And Virginia Woolf.
But when I was being taught at Oxford in the late 60s and doing graduate work there, she was... I put this in the book, actually, in terms of how she changes.
She was described to me by my male tutor.
as a minor figure in the modernist movement, not to be classed with Joyce or Eliot or Pound.
And it, you know, it infiltrated my consciousness, that reading of it.
Was it gender bias in your view?
Well, I think it was gender bias now, but I think it was also, there were a lot of English critics, John Bailey, John Kerry, you know, a lot of distinguished English critics, men,
but Queen Elis did it too, who have her down as a minor writer, you know, a not very good minor writer.
And this is a very prevalent view of her in my country.
Continuing to this day?
Oh yes, oh yes.
I have a sort of friendly ongoing argument with a couple of very well-known distinguished male critics in Britain who think that her writing is piffle.
Well, I mean, you wouldn't dare say that here in the United States.
No, it's a big difference.
You do that at your peril.
Yes.
I won't try it.
As a matter of fact, you often listen to me, and me haven't been.
I wouldn't, you know.
But that surprises me, really.
No, it's true.
It's a big difference.
As I say, it's a class thing, partly.
I think they think she's too... She's too privileged.
She's too... David Lodge, writing a good book on Christmas in the modern novel, has this sentence, which I always...
It interests me.
He said, we do not always think of eternity while peeling potatoes, but Junior Wolf's characters always do.
And he's thinking of Mrs. Ramsay pouring out the soup at the dinner party and thinking, my life has failed.
And he thinks it's too spoiled.
He thinks that if these people had a decent job, they wouldn't have the time to be doing this kind of inner thinking.
You were talking about words that are new to us in context.
a word that I've just recently come across, especially since I started this new study.
This whole book I'm working on, this whole concept of book culture, books of the future, books, libraries, what's happening to printed text.
Should be a guess, wouldn't you, at the prospect of a printed book?
People actually have things being
No, she was interested in technology.
She was interested in new technology.
She invents for herself the idea of a telephone where you can see people at the other end of the phone.
She has a fantasy about an electronic device that would enable you to plug into the past.
One of that crap's last tape.
She's very interested in technology.
I think she would have rather liked computers and audio books.
She would not bemoan the passage of printed books as an artifact.
Well, no, she would want to keep the print.
I don't believe Sven Berkowitz, or whatever his name is.
Berkowitz.
The printed book kids.
Well, I think he's very... He lives around here, as a matter of fact.
Don't worry, he's at it within a hearing distance.
We'll just miss that.
I mean, I don't believe in the death of the book.
I think people go on wanting to have a thing that they can, maybe not in this case, carry around with them, but, you know, have as their own thing and turn the pages.
Yeah, well, there is a... By the way, what's your... We have two minutes.
Two.
Oh.
Will you inscribe this for me?
It's just I want to take a little break before the next day.
Okay, good.
Talking about American literature.
It's deep irony, which is that my first job
When I graduated from Oxford was as an English-speaking union Woodrow Wilson visiting junior fellow to America.
And I went to William and Mary and had a wonderful year there and taught nothing but English literature.
When I came back in 1971, I applied for every job that was going that summer in every English university and was interviewed at Liverpool University, where I spent the next seven years
And at my interview, they said, oh, you've been in America.
You'll obviously be able to teach our American Literature Program, which they were just evolving then.
So I found it was very funny.
Three months later, I had to give five lectures on Emerson.
I shall never forget it, never having it.
So I spent the whole summer reading The American Scholar and Nature and Self-Reliance.
And actually, it took me a while to get into it.
But I became an American.
It's complete bison.
And then I kind of got very interested in it and wrote on Roth and wrote on Willacather.
And my next book is going to be on Edith Wharton.
Very, very interesting.
The right books?
Not as long.